Introduction
This supplement is designed to provide an easy to learn, adaptable rules set for ship to ship combat in 5th edition. While these rules and ship stats are designed with gunpowder and cannons in mind, they can easily be adapted to any fantasy setting by rebranding or modifying attacks.
The Basics
Ships are based on monster stat blocks. They have their own CR number to aid the DM in balancing encounters.
HP and damage are scaled down for speed and simplicity by a factor of 1:5.
Combat is on a hex grid (1 hex =50ft).
Wind matters, but it’s simple and optional.
Ships may turn, and typically they must move at least 1 space.
Initiative is rolled each round, but only ships and solo creatures roll. Passengers act on their ship's initiative.
Each ship has a Captain. That captain assigns Action Points for their ship at the top of each round.
Most actions require the ship to make an ability or skill check; characters can choose Action Stations on their turn to help with these checks.
Customizing ships is easy and fun!
Ship Statistics
Ship statistics are adapted from 5e monsters, but they have been mutated to be more applicable for inanimate vehicles. Some stats, like Constitution, represent a ship's physical construction, while others represent the crew’s skill (like Charisma).
Strength. The potency of a ship’s attacks. This could represent the size of its siege weapons or the precise aim of a well trained crew. Uses: damage roll modifier.
Dexterity. How maneuverable a ship. Smaller ships are more dexterous.Uses: initiative modifier, “Coming About” action.
Constitution. Construction quality and fortitude of a ship. Uses: hit point calculation.
Charisma. Represents the quality of the crew and their leadership. Henceforth referred to as Skill. Uses: To Hit, “Full Sail” action, "Repair" action.
AC. Represents the resilience of the ship’s hull or its small size and agility.
Speed. The number of 50ft spaces the ship can move a turn with favorable winds. Also the maximum number of 25 mile spaces a ship can travel a day at a normal travel speed. See the section on “Wind and Movement.”
Hit Points and Formula. The amount of damage a ship can take before it is Derelict. This number is scaled down by a factor 1:5 when compared to creature-scale encounters. See the section on “Dice and Scaling”.
Crew. The minimum number of crew needed to operate the ship without being Stressed. Crew numbers are not tracked for the purposes of ship combat but can be used for boarding, Mob Combat, and roleplaying.
Max Crew. The maximum number of crew and passengers this ship can carry comfortably on long voyages. Most ships can carry double this number on short voyages such as raids or refugee operations.
Cargo. The number of cargo "slots" the ship has, ranging from 0-6. Cargo might have different value in different ports.
Size
Ships have their own scale separate from creatures. 
Uses: hit point calculation, ramming.
Ship Sizes
Dice and Scaling
The damages rolls and hit points in this supplement are scaled by a factor of 1:5 when compared to creature scale combat. For example, a ship that has 10hp and deals 1d6 damage would have 50hp if attacked by a creature, and it would deal 1d6 x 5 damage. Any damage dealt to ships by creatures should be rounded down to the nearest 5, or you can track exact ship hit points by multiplying their base value by five. A fireball spell could hypothetically sink a rowboat or canoe in one shot, but a 1st Rate Ship of the Line could have 1,000 hp!
Skill and Ability Test Difficulty
The default difficulty for skill and ability checks during ship combat is DC12. Checks are rolled by the acting Captain unless another character is at a corresponding Action Station. The DM can modify the DC based on conditions like rough seas, weather, surprise, terrain, or a crew that is inexperienced, wounded, or frightened.
Movement and Position
Ship combat is played on a 1” hex grid where each hex represents 50ft from center to center. Most ships will take up 1 to 3 hexes. They should be orientated with the center of the ship on the center of a hex with the bow and stern crossing perpendicular edges. Generally, a ship’s bow will only face one of 6 different hex directions, though the DM may allow “half-turns” in certain instances like boarding or navigating terrain. All turns are 60 degree rotations (one hex face) from the center of the ship.
Moving a Ship
A ship may move up to its full movement each turn after adjusting for the wind.
All ships must move at least 1” (exceptions: In Irons, Anchored)
A ship must move directly forward to the space in front of its bow.
A ship may rotate twice (rotate one hex face or 60º) at any point before, during, or after its movement, but no ship may turn more than once per space.
Ships that are In Irons may not move forward but may still rotate once.
Ships that are Anchored cannot move or turn.
Wind and Movement
The wind direction is an important part of sailing. Some groups might find using rules for wind cumbersome, while others might find a thrill in the extra element of strategy it add, especially when a spell caster may be able to alter conditions. Use the following option rules if you want to use wind in your encounters.
Wind Direction
Points of Sail
Ship sailing speeds depend on the angle of the wind. A ship's point of sail is determined at the start of its turnand does not change during its turn. If a ship starts its turn With the Wind and then turns Close to the Wind, it still gets its full movement that turn.
Points of Sail
Example: If the wind is coming from 1 (North), this ship is In Irons and cannot move (but may still turn once). If the wind is coming from 2 or 6, it is sailing Close to the windand may only move half of its normal speed; at 3, 4, and 5 it would be With the Wind and can move its full movement.
Anchoring a Ship
A ship that is Anchored cannot move or turn, and has a max speed of 0. In an emergency the crew can Cut and Run.
Drop Anchor. Cost: All of a ship's action points. The crew lowers the anchor(s) and the ship's speed is reduced to 0.
Weighing Anchor. Cost: All of a ship's action points. The crew raises the ship's anchor(s). The ship's max speed is deduced to half for this turn.
Cut and Run. (Cost: 0 Action Points) The ship is no longer anchored, but will drift until new anchors are acquired! The ship's max speed is reduced to half for this turn.
Arc of Fire
In the age of gunpowder weapons, most ships carried the majority of their arsenal along the side of the ship, requiring the vessel to maneuver to port or starboard in order for most cannons to have a shot a target they were chasing. Broadside refers to this area. Some other attacks, like the 1st Rate’s Chase Guns, can only fire Fore & Aft.
The Order of Combat
Like creature combat, ship combat is organized into turns and rounds. Initiative is rolled for each ship, and the creatures on that ship all act on their ship’s turn. Independent creatures like sea monsters or characters that are not on a ship roll their own initiative.
Sailing is slow, and weapons take time to reload, but these rules are designed to be fast and fun. For the purposes of rules and action economy, a round of combat represents 6 seconds in the game world, though 30 seconds to 1 minute is a more thematic representation.
Combat Round Step by Step
Captain Phase. Captains choose their ship’s actions, and they may roll to Push the Crew.
Declare Lookout & Bosuns. Any PCs may declare these stations now. Bosuns may try to Raise Morale.
Roll Initiative. Lookouts (or Captains) roll initiative, then apply Lookout & Bosun modifiers.
Take turns. Each ship takes a turn in initiative order. On a ship’s turn, characters may take actions in any order they see fit. Each may claim an Action Station based on the Captains chosen action points, and they may choose a different station each turn. They may also choose another action like casting a spell. Ships and characters may Ready actions to trigger anytime before the ship’s next turn.
Begin the next round. Repeat the steps until the combat is over.
Captain’s Phase
During this phase, each ship’s Captain decides what actions the ship will take. Each ship has a set number of Action Points and the Captain can spend any of these to assign actions for the characters and crew on board to carry out later in the turn. Any actions not carried out by the other characters will be rolled by the Captain. The captain may also roll to push the Crew (see the section on the Captain Action Station).
Initiative Phase
Initiative is rerolled each round of combat. After all Captains have decided their ships’ actions for the turn, each ship rolls a d20 and adds its DEX modifier. This roll is made by the Captain unless the ship has a Lookout. See the section on “Action Stations”.
A Ship’s Turn
On a ship’s turn, the Pilot or Captain may move a distance up to the ship’s speed and make two rotations. The characters may take any actions that the Captain spent action points on at the beginning of the round, plus any other actions or bonus actions like the Bosun’s Raise Morale ability or casting a spell. After the characters have gone, the Captain rolls for any actions the characters didn’t complete. These actions may be taken before, after, or at any point along the ship’s movement.
Characters may also Ready actions (i.e. wait for a target to be in range.) If the ship holds any Attack actions, it may make all of its attacks when the Ready action is triggered, not just one attack (as you would during character combat).
Action Point actions are optional and the characters and crew do not have to take actions unless they or the captain want to, but the ship make not change what actions it choose until the beginning of the next round.
Ramming & Collisions
Ramming
At the beginning of the turn, a captain may spend all of a ship’s Action Points to declare a ram. On that ship's turn, if it ends its movement with any of its forward three sides touching another ship it rams. Both ships roll their base hit die and add +1 to their roll for each space traveled since the beginning of its last turn. Deal that much damage to the other ship. In addition, each ship that was part of a Ram since the start of its last turn is considered to be Anchored (speed 0, can't turn) for 1 turn.
If for some reason the ramming ship cannot get to a space adjacent to another ship, it does not ram and its Action Points are lost.
Another test for whether a ship can ram is this: if the hex directly in front of the ramming ship overlaps with another ship's hex or the hex in front of or behind the target ship then the ship can ram.
Example. A brigantine (7d10+14 hp) rams into a sloop (6d8+6 hp). The brigantine travels 3 spaces before making contact, so it will deal 1d10+3 damage to the sloop. The sloop moved 5 spaces on its last turn, so it will deal 1d8+5 damage to the brigantine. Both ships are considered Anchored for their next turn. 

Collisions
If a ship collides with something (shoals, a large rock or island, another ship unintentionally) it will take damage equal to one of its hit dice plus the distance it traveled since the start of its last turn. In addition, each ship that was part of a Collision since the start of its last turn is considered to be Anchored for 1 turn. The DM might also deal damage to the object the ship collided with, and might impose other effects like the ship being stuck until a Repair action is taken.
Ship Action Summary
Character Actions
Each turn, a character may spend their action to claim an Action Station (PCs still get a bonus action, free action, and reaction). Choosing a station is optional and they can be chosen again each round. Any actions that are not covered by a PC are rolled for by the Captain using the ship’s stats (but without any Sailing Dice).
Sailing Dice
Most Actions Stations allow each character to add a d4 Sailing Die to one of the ship’s checks.
Action Stations
Captain
Limit 1/ship, required
Each ship must have an assigned Captain. If a ship doesn't have a PC captain the DM can let one act as Captain. At the beginning of the round, the captain chooses actions for each of the ship’s action points. Captains that choose the attack action only need to decide how many points to allocate when choosing the action. The attacks used and their targets may be chosen on the ship's turn.
Push the Crew. During a time of need the Captain may to push the crew to their limits. As a bonus action, the Captain may attempt an Intimidation or Persuasion check. On a success, the ship gains one extra action point this turn but loses one action point next turn. A Captain may not attempt to push the crew two turns in a row.
Pilot
Limit 1 PC/ship 
The Pilot moves the ship's token, and makes the roll if the ship is attempting to Come About using the ship’s DEXand adding their Sailing Die. The Pilot also makes any checks required to navigate terrain or obstacles.
Lookout
Limit 1 PC/ship 
Before initiative is rolled each round, any PC may spend their action to become the Lookout. The Lookouts roll initiative for the ship, and add or subtract their Sailing Die from the result. Ships with Lookouts get +1 AC.
Bosun
Limit 1 PC/ship 
This station may be claimed at any time, including before initiative has been rolled.
Raise Morale. As a bonus action, the bosun may make an Intimidation or Persuasion skill check to choose one of the following: give all of the ship’s attacks and skill check rolls +1 this turn, or temporarily remove the Stressed condition from the ship for one turn (ship can still Repair).
Gunner
Limit 1 PC per Ship's attack 
The gunners choose weapons and targets, and roll any attacks using the ship’s Skill, adding their Sailing Die to their first attack roll. If there is more than one gunner, they take turns rolling attacks until there are no attacks left.
Carpenter
No Limit 
The Carpenter rolls to Repair the ship using the ship’s Skill (at disadvantage due to the Stressed condition), and adds their Sailing Die to the result. If there are multiple Carpenters, only one makes the Skill roll but each adds their Sailing Die to the total.
Rigger
No Limit 
The Rigger rolls to go Full Sail using the ship’s Skill, adding their Sailing Die to the result. If there are multiple Riggers, choose one to make the roll, but each may add their Sailing Die to the total.
Other Actions
Characters may take other actions like casting a spell, attacking another creature, swinging from the rigging, diving from a ship, etc
Leveling Up Sailing Abilities
While characters can choose any action station, it can be fun to have characters “level up” and gain experience at certain stations. Here are some ideas for exploring this concept:
Increase the value of a Sailing Die (d6, d8, etc.)
Adding modifiers to Sailing Dice (+1, +2, a PCs Proficiency modifier )
Exploding Sailing Dice (reroll and add again when rolling the max value)
Giving Advantage to sailing die rolls
Covering two action stations at once
Increasing Gunners’ damage or "to hit"modifier
Giving the Bosun a larger bonus
Giving the Lookout advantage or disadvantage on Initiative
Giving an experienced Captain a Sailing Die that they can include in any roll
New Conditions
Stressed
A ship is Stressed when it has less than half of its starting hit points. A ship is also Stressed if it has less than the required crew. A stressed ship has Disadvantage on all attacks and skill checks. Only Stressed ships may take the Repair action. The Bosun action station can take the Raise Morale action to attempt to temporarily remove this condition (the ship make still take the Repair action).
Derelict
A ship is Derelict when it has 0 hit points. Its speed is 0, it cannot rotate, and it may only spend its Action Points on the Repair action.
Drifting. The DM may choose to have a Derelict ship drift one space each turn depending on weather conditions.
Sinking. Every time a Derelict ship takes additional damage, it must make a Sinking saving throw. Roll a d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, the ship does not sink. Otherwise it fails and the ship sinks into the water. If a Derelict ship is hit with a critical hit, it immediately fails its Sinking saving throw.
Repairing. The only action a Derelict ship may take is Repair, which must be made at Disadvantage. If the Repair action is successful, the ship loses the Derelict condition and regains 1 hit point (instead of the normal amount recovered by the Repair action).
Boarding & Close Combat
After ships are close enough to engage in close combat or creature scale combat, DMs are encouraged to switch to a 5ft square grid maps. Mass combat and Mob combat rules can be used to deal with the crew, but, like any good story, it's the heroes and not the extras that matter!
Customizing Ships
The ships in this supplement are intended as a jumping off point. A tough warship might have more hit points. An old pirate sloop might be in need of repair and move very slow. Perhaps the characters have acquired a living ship that can cast a gust of wind spell several times a day. The sky's the limit.
You can give ships extra abilities just by borrowing them from existing monsters. Have a haunted ghost ship? How about adding a Ghost’s Etherealness and Horrifying Visage to a ships stat block. Is the flagship in the fleet issuing commands? Use the Leadership ability from a Knight. Here are some jumping off points for:
Aggressive. Upgraded cannons.
Breath Weapon. Unique or upgrade ship weapons.
Damage Resistance. Armor plating, flame resistant.
Damage Vulnerabilities. Old, weak ships.
Elementals. Magical wind, water, and fire ships.
Etherealness. Ghost or Fey ships.
Feats. Character feats like Lucky, Savage Attacker, or Inspiring Leader.
Flying Speed. Steampunk airship, Hot Air Vessels.
Incorporeal Movement. Ghost or Spirit ships.
Invisibility. Fog bank ability or a mage on board.
Leadership. Flag ships, military vessels.
Legendary Resistance. Tough, boss level ships.
Legendary Actions. Ships with extra crew.
Magic Resistance. Enchantments and protection runes.
Martial Advantage. Well armed marines or buccaneers shoot muskets at close by enemies.
Pack Tactics. Fleets of canoes or small warships.
Parry. Evasive maneuvers, skilled pilot.
Ram. Battering ram: advantage on ram actions.
Reel. Grappling hooks, magic tractor beams.
Regeneration. Skilled carpenters.
Relentless. Armor plating, reinforced hull.
Spellcasting. Mage on board, living ships.
Swallow. Mimic ships, sea monsters.
Teleport. Magic or haunted ships, alien vessels.
Undead Fortitude. Undead ships.
Ship Stats
Ship Abilities
Below are descriptions for abilities listed in the Ship Stats table.
Weatherly. This ship does not decrease its max speed when sailing Close to the Wind.
Oars. This ship may spend half of its action points (rounded down) to travel 2 spaces in any direction. This is in addition to its normal movement and is not affected by wind.
Sluggish. This ship may only rotate once per turn (unless taking the Come About action).
Heavy Armor. This ship has Resistance against attacks that deal 10 damage or less.
Ships typically carry round shot (cannon balls), by default, but other types of ammo may be purchased from shipwrights. Additional ammunition ideas: canister shot, heated shot, spider shot, smoke bombs, poisonous canisters, random cargo (fork and knives), bones, and magical ammo.
Round Shot
Round shot, or simply "cannon balls", are accurate and deadly at long range. They can cause massive damage against their targets and are used in all types of naval warfare, especially when the primary objective is sinking the enemy.
Range. As listed on ship card (typically 6"/12")
Critical Hit. Critical hits function as normal: roll damage dice twice.
Exploding Critical Hits. For an added level of chance and excitement, DMs may consider "exploding" critical hit damage dice to represent a ship taking extreme damage (ex. hitting the gunpowder magazine). When damage dice are rolled, any dice that roll the maximum value are rolled again, adding their value to the total. Repeat until no maximum values are rolled.
Chain Shot
Chain shot is made by attaching two cannonballs—or two halves of a single cannonball—together with a chain. It is designed to attack a ship's masts and rigging and is typically used to slow ships down.
Range. 3”/6”
Target Masts & Rigging. Attacks made with Chain Shot deal half damage, rounded down. Any ship that has taken damage from Chain Shot moves at half speed (rounded down, minimum of 1) until the end of its next turn.
Critical Hit. When a Chain Shot attack scores a critical hit, the target ship’s speed is 0 until the end of its next turn.
GrapeShot
Grapeshot is made by filling a bag or hollow ball with small round metal balls, similar to shotgun shells. It is very effective against creatures but less so against a ship's hull.
Range. 3”/6”
Target Crew. Attacks made with Grapeshot deal half damage rounded down. Any ship that has taken any damage from Grape Shot has disadvantage on Skill checks and has -1 action point (minimum of 1) until the end of its next turn.
Critical Hit. When a Grapeshot attack scores a critical hit, the target ship loses half of its action points (rounded down to a minimum of 1) until the end of its next turn.
Ship Challenge Rating Ratio Table
Encounter Balancing
The above table can be used to quickly balance naval encounters, though it is intended as a very rough guide. For example, if the characters control a CR3 Frigate, 3 to 8 CR1 Sloops should be a balanced encounter mathematically, while a CR4 or higher vessel might out gun them.
Note that ships with characters on board will undoubtedly have advantages—both strategically and statistically—when compared to NPC ships, and factors like positioning, wind, and ship condition can quickly swing the outcome of an encounter.
Deadly Naval Encounters
When running naval encounters, DMs are encouraged to keep in mind that a losing naval battle is much harder for characters to escape from than a typical creature scale encounter. Alternative to TPKs include:
Surrender and capture (and a jailbreak!)
Sinking the ship and having character search for floating debris (to then wash ashore, be rescued, or be swallowed by a dragon turtle)
“Deus ex machina” style events like a ally's ship arriving to save the day, inclement weather moving in, or massive sea monsters attacking mid battle