

=== PAGE 1 ===
L

=== PAGE 2 ===
 
  


=== PAGE 3 ===
CreditsCredits
If you enjoy this supplement, you can become a Limithron
patron to get ship token, upgrades, ammo types, more
ship stats, ship cards, art handouts, encounter building
guidelines, ship customization options, terrain, and large
scale battlemaps: www.limithron.com
Designed and Illustrated by: Luke Stratton | Limithron 
 
 
On the Cover & Page 10: The Battle of Trafalgar by
William Clarkson Stanfield, 1836, Public Doman (PD-US-
expired), Courtesy of Wikimedia.org. 
 
 
Playtesting and Feedback Provided By: 
Tyler "Blackwood" Stratton, Scott "Tezomoc" Sesko, Ryan
"La Chance" Zanger, Kevin "The Alderman" Campbell, Tad
Edwards, Drakon Vines, Morrie, Bilge Goblin 
 
 
The following sources have provided inspiration: 
 
Little, Benerson. The Sea Rover's Practice. 2005. 
Lambert, Andrew. War at Sea in the Age of Sail. 2000.
Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag, Ubisoft, 2013. 
Sid Meier's Pirates!, Firaxis Games/Atari, 2004. 
Tuñez, Mike. Oak & Iron, Firelock Games, 2020. 
Pirates of the Spanish Main, WizKids, Inc. 2004. 
 
© 2021 Luke Stratton DBA Limithron. All Rights Reserved.
 
v1.2r
ForewordForeword
This supplement is intended as a jumping off point for
making ship to ship combat in 5e fun, exciting, fast, and
most of all engaging. No ones want to just sit there while
one player commands the ship, but at the same time
getting bogged down in sailing rules can be cumbersome
and boring. Spellcasters should be able to affect naval
combat, but the barbarian shouldn’t be able to sink a ship
with their axe without a lot of effort. And if the bard wants
to swing across to the enemy ship and launch a full-on
assault on the enemy captain’s feelings, well, then I think
he “can certainly try”.
After years of playing pirate miniature games and video
games, and several more years running my own RPG
campaign, Tales from the Caribbean, I think I’ve finally
cracked the code. With ships, it’s really easy to be too
complicated. Too many dice, too many ship stats and hit
points, too many rules about wind and speed, complicated
boarding rules... no thank you! The ships in the guide aren’t
any more complicated than skeletons. Well, enormous
skeletons with 100 passengers, movement that depends
on the wind, and attacks that deal over 80 damage a turn.
But, yeah, skeletons.
So let your players blow stuff up and steal some booty.
Let them capture five huge ships and learn first hand why
that's a bad idea. Make them fear for their lives by chasing
them with overpowered pirate hunting vessels. Create your
own enchanted Man of War with wings for sails and fire
breath attacks. You are the captain now. 
 
Yo, Ho, Ho and Happy Sailing,
Luke Stratton 
March 2021
 
ContentsContents
Naval Combat Rules
Appendix A: Ships
Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of
the Coast, LLC. System Reference Document 5.1
Copyright 2016, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.; Authors Mike
Mearls, Jeremy Crawford, Chris Perkins, Rodney Thompson,
Peter Lee, James Wyatt, Robert J. Schwalb, Bruce R.
Cordell, Chris Sims, and Steve Townshend, based on
original material by E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson.
3

=== PAGE 4 ===


=== PAGE 5 ===
IntroductionIntroduction
T
his supplement is designed to provide an
easy to learn, adaptable rules set for ship to
ship combat in 5th edition. While these
rules and ship stats are designed with
gunpowder and cannons in mind, they can
easily be adapted to any fantasy setting by
rebranding or modifying attacks.
The BasicsThe Basics
Ships are based on monster stat blocks. They have their
own CR number to aid the DM in balancing encounters.
HP and damage are scaled down for speed and
simplicity by a factor of 1:5.
Combat is on a hex grid (1 hex =50ft).
Wind matters, but it’s simple and optional.
Ships may turn, and typically they must move at least 1
space.
Initiative is rolled each round, but only ships and solo
creatures roll. Passengers act on their ship's initiative.
Each ship has a Captain. That captain assigns Action
Points for their ship at the top of each round.
Most actions require the ship to make an ability or skill
check; characters can choose Action Stations on their
turn to help with these checks.
Customizing ships is easy and fun!
Ship StatisticsShip Statistics
Ship statistics are adapted from 5e monsters, but they
have been mutated to be more applicable for inanimate
vehicles. Some stats, like Constitution, represent a ship's
physical construction, while others represent the crew’s
skill (like Charisma).
Strength. The potency of a ship’s attacks. This could
represent the size of its siege weapons or the precise aim
of a well trained crew. Uses: damage roll modifier.
Dexterity. How maneuverable a ship. Smaller ships are
more dexterous.Uses: initiative modifier, “Coming About”
action.
Constitution. Construction quality and fortitude of a
ship. Uses: hit point calculation.
Charisma. Represents the quality of the crew and their
leadership. Henceforth referred to as Skill.Uses: To Hit,
“Full Sail” action.
AC. Represents the resilience of the ship’s hull or its
small size and agility.
Speed. The number of 50ft spaces the ship can move a
turn with favorable winds. Also the maximum number of
50 mile spaces a ship can travel a day. See the section on
“Wind and Movement.”
Hit Points and Formula. The amount of damage a ship
can take before it is Derelict. This number is scaled down
by a factor 1:5 when compared to creature-scale
encounters. See the section on “Dice and Scaling”.
Crew. The minimum number of crew needed to operate
the ship without being Stressed. Crew numbers are not
tracked for the purposes of ship combat but can be used
for boarding, Mob Combat, and roleplaying.
Max Crew. The maximum number of crew and
passengers this ship can carry comfortably on long
voyages. Most ships can carry double this number on short
voyages such as raids or refugee operations.
Cargo. The number of cargo "slots" the ship has,
ranging from 0-6. Cargo might have different value in
different ports.
SizeSize
Ships have their own scale separate from creatures.  
Uses: hit point calculation, ramming.
Ship Sizes
Size Space Hit Die Example Ships
Tiny <30ft d4 Rowboat, canoe
Small <50ft d6 Longboat
Medium <75 d8 Sloop
Large <100ft d10 Brigantine
Huge <125ft d12 Man of War
Gargantuan >125ft d20 Ship of the Line
Dice and ScalingDice and Scaling
The dice rolls and statistics in this supplement are scaled
by a factor of 1:5 when compared to creature scale
combat. For example, a ship that has 10hp and deals 1d6
damage would have 50hp if attacked by a creature, and it
would deal 1d6 x 5 damage. Any damage dealt to ships by
creatures should be rounded down to the nearest 5, or you
can track exact ship hit points by multiplying their base
value by five. A fireball spell could hypothetically sink a
rowboat or canoe in one shot, but a 1st Rate Ship of the
Line could have 1,000hp!
Skill and Ability Test DiﬃcultySkill and Ability Test Diﬃculty
The default difficulty for skill and ability checks during ship
combat is DC12. Checks are rolled by the acting Captain
unless another character is at a corresponding Action
Station. The DM can modify the DC based on conditions
like rough seas, weather, surprise, terrain, or a crew that is
inexperienced, wounded, or frightened.
Limithron's Guide to Naval Combat | www.limithron.com
 5

=== PAGE 6 ===
Movement and PositionMovement and Position
Ship combat is played on a 1” hex grid where each hex
represents 50ft from center to center. Most ships will
take up 1 to 3 hexes. They should be orientated with the
center of the ship on the center of a hex with the bow and
stern crossing perpendicular edges. Generally, a ship’s bow
will only face one of 6 different hex directions, though the
DM may allow “half-turns” in certain instances like
boarding or navigating terrain. All turns are 60 degree
rotations (one hex face) from the center of the ship.
Moving a ShipMoving a Ship
A ship may move up to its full movement each turn
after adjusting for the wind.
All ships must move at least 1” (exceptions: In Irons,
Anchored)
A ship must move directly forward to the space in
front of its bow.
A ship may rotate twice (rotate one hex face or 60º) at
any point before, during, or after its movement, but no
ship may turn more than once per space.
Ships that are In Irons may not move forward but may
still rotate once.
Ships that are Anchored cannot move or turn.
Wind and MovementWind and Movement
The wind direction is an important part of sailing. Some
groups might find using rules for wind cumbersome, while
others might find a thrill in the extra element of strategy it
add, especially when a spell caster may be able to alter
conditions. Use the following option rules if you want to
use wind in your encounters.
W ind Direction
d6 Flat Top Hexes Pointy Top Hexes
1 North Northeast
2 Northeast East
3 Southeast Southeast
4 South Southwest
5 Southwest West
6 Northwest Northwest
Points of SailPoints of Sail
Ship sailing speeds depend on the angle of the wind. A
ship's point of sail is determined at the start of its turn
and does not change during its turn. If a ship starts its turn
With the Wind and then turns Close to the Wind, it still
gets its full movement that turn.
Points of Sail
Point of Sail Ship Speed
With the wind Full speed
Close to the wind Half speed rounded down (min. 1”)
In Irons Speed 0” (can still turn once)
 
Example: If the wind is coming from 1 (North), this ship is
In Irons and cannot move (but may still turn once). If the
wind is coming from 2 or 6, it is sailing Close to the wind
and may only move half of its normal speed; at 3, 4, and 5
it would be With the Wind and can move its full
movement.
Ramming
A ship may attempt to Ram another ship. At thebeginning of the turn, the captain may spend all ofthe ship’s Action Points to declare a ram. On theship's turn, if it ends its movement with any of itsforward three sides touching another ship it mayattempt to ram. Both ships roll a die equal to theirbase hit die. The ramming ship adds +1 to its roll foreach space it traveled this turn. The winning shipdeals damage to the losing ship as though it hadjust dealt a critical hit with its primary attack.Example. A brigantine (7d10+14 hp) rams into asloop (6d8+6 hp). The brigantine travels 3 spacesbefore making contact. It will roll 1d10+3 versusthe sloops 1d8. If the brigantine wins it will dealcritical hit damage (2d10+3 ) to the sloop.If for some reason the ramming ship cannot getto a space adjacent to another ship, it does not ramand its Action Points are lost.
Limithron's Guide to Naval Combat | www.limithron.com
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
Anchoring a Ship
A ship that is Anchored cannot move or turn, andhas a max speed of 0. In an emergency the crewcan Cut and Run.Drop Anchor. Cost: All of a ship's action points.The crew lowers the anchor(s) and the ship's speedis reduced to 0.Weighing Anchor. Cost: All of a ship's actionpoints. The crew raises the ship's anchor(s). Theship's max speed is deduced to half for this turn.Cut and Run. (Cost: 0 Action Points) The ship isno longer anchored, but will drift until new anchorsare acquired! The ship's max speed is reduced tohalf for this turn.
 
The Order of CombatThe Order of Combat
Like creature combat, ship combat is organized into turns
and rounds. Initiative is rolled for each ship, and the
creatures on that ship all act on their ship’s turn.
Independent creatures like sea monsters or characters that
are not on a ship roll their own initiative.
Sailing is slow, and weapons take time to reload, but
these rules are designed to be fast and fun. For the
purposes of rules and action economy, a round of
combat represents 6 seconds in the game world, though
30 seconds to 1 minute is a more thematic
representation.
Combat Round Step by StepCombat Round Step by Step
1. Captain Phase. Captains choose their ship’s actions,
and they may roll to Push the Crew.
2. Initiative. Declare any Lookouts. Lookouts (or
Captains) roll initiative.
3. Take turns. Each ship takes a turn in initiative order.
On a ship’s turn, characters may go in any order they
see fit. Each may choose an Action Station based on
the Captains chosen actions, and they may choose a
different station each turn. They may also choose
another action like casting a spell. Ships and characters
may Ready actions to trigger anytime before the ship’s
next turn.
4. Begin the next round. Repeat the steps until the
combat is over.
Captain’s PhaseCaptain’s Phase
During this phase, each ship’s Captain decides what
actions the ship will take. Each ship has a set number of
Action Points and the Captain can spend any of these to
assign actions for the characters and crew on board to
carry out later in the turn. Any actions not carried out by
the other characters will be rolled by the Captain.
Push the CrewPush the Crew
During a time of need the Captain may decide to push the
crew to their limits. If the Captain makes a successful
Intimidation or Persuasion check, the ship gains one extra
action point this turn but loses one action point next turn.
A Captain cannot Push the Crew if they succeed in doing
so the previous round.
Initiative PhaseInitiative Phase
Initiative is rerolled each round of combat. After all
Captains have decided their ships’ actions for the turn,
each ship rolls a d20 and adds its DEX modifier. This roll is
made by the Captain unless the ship has a Lookout. See
the section on “Action Stations”.
A Ship’s TurnA Ship’s Turn
On a ship’s turn, the Pilot or Captain may move a
distance up to the ship’s speed and make two
rotations. The characters may take any actions that the
Captain chose at the beginning of the round, plus any
other actions like the Bosun’s Raise Morale ability or
casting a spell. After the characters have gone, the Captain
rolls for any actions the characters didn’t take. These
actions may be taken before, after, or at any point along
the ship’s movement. Characters may also Ready actions
(i.e. wait for a target to be in range.)  
 
Arc of Fire
 In the age of gunpowder weapons, most shipscarried the majority of their arsenal along the sideof the ship, requiring the vessel to maneuver to thesides for most cannons to have a shot, requiringthem to turn to hit a target they were chasing.Broadside refers to this area. Other attacks, like the1st Rate’s Chase Guns, can only fire Fore & Aft.
Limithron's Guide to Naval Combat | www.limithron.com
 7

=== PAGE 8 ===
Ship Actions
Action Point Cost Description Action Station
Attack (Broadside) 1 Attack with primary attack at a target in the ship's Broadside arc. Gunner
Attack (Fore/Aft) 2 Attack with secondary attack: roll one die rank lower  (ie. d4 instead of d6, d6 instead of d8, etc.) Gunner
Repair All Recover hit points equal to primary attack damage  or remove the Derelict condition. Carpenter
Full Sail 2 Move one extra space this turn. Rigger
Come About * Rotate one extra rotation this turn. Cost is ship dependent (default 2). Pilot
Ram All Ram if any forward faces of its main hex touch another ship. Roll 1 hit die plus distance traveled vs. opponents hit die. Winner deals a critical hit. -
Drop Anchor All Speed 0 and Anchored. -
Weigh Anchor All Speed 1/2 and no longer Anchored. -
Cut and Run 0 Speed 1/2, no longer Anchored, but will drift when stopped. -
Change Ammo Type 0 Change ammo (round shot, chain shot, grape shot, etc.) See Appendix B. -
Character ActionsCharacter Actions
Each turn, a character may spend their action to claim any
of the available Action Stations detailed below. All are
optional and can be chosen each round. Any actions that
are not covered by a PC are rolled for by the Captain using
the ship’s stats but without any Sailing Dice.
Sailing DiceSailing Dice
Most Actions Stations allow each character to add a d4
Sailing Die to one of the ship’s checks.
Action StationsAction Stations
CaptainCaptain
Limit 1/ship, required
Each ship must have an assigned Captain. If a ship
doesn't have a PC captain the DM can let one act as
Captain. At the beginning of the round, the captain
chooses actions for each of the ship’s action points.
Being the captain takes a character's action. Captains that
choose the attack action only need to decide how many
points to allocate when choosing the action. The weapons
used and their targets may be chosen on the ship's turn.
Push the Crew. During a time of need the Captain may
to push the crew to their limits. As a bonus action, the
Captain may attempt an Intimidation or Persuasion check.
On a success, the ship gains one extra action point this
turn but loses one action point next turn. A Captain may
not attempt to push the crew two turns in a row.
PilotPilot
Limit 1/ship  
The Pilot moves the ship's token, and makes the roll if the
ship is attempting to Come About using the ship’s DEX
and adding their Sailing Die. The Pilot also makes any
checks required to navigate terrain or obstacles.
LookoutLookout
Limit 1/ship  
Before initiative is rolled each round, any character may
spend their action to become the Lookout. The Lookout
rolls initiative for the ship, and they may add or
subtract their Sailing Die from the result. In addition, any
ship with a Lookout has +1 AC.
BosunBosun
Limit 1/ship  
This station may be claimed at any time, including before
initiative has been rolled.
Raise Morale. May make an Intimidation or Persuasion
skill check to choose one of the following: give all of the
ship’s attacks and skill check rolls +1 this turn, or
temporarily remove the Stressed condition from the ship
for one turn.
GunnerGunner
Limit 1 per attack  
The gunners choose weapons and targets, and roll any
attacks using the ship’s Skill, adding their Sailing Die to
the first attack roll. If there is more than one gunner, they
take turns rolling attacks until there are no attacks left.
CarpenterCarpenter
No Limit  
The Carpenter rolls to Repair the ship using the ship’s
Skill, adding their Sailing Die to the result. If there are
multiple Carpenters, choose one to make the roll, but each
may add their Sailing Die to the total.
RiggerRigger
No Limit  
The Rigger rolls to go Full Sail using the ship’s Skill,
adding their Sailing Die to the result. If there are multiple
Riggers, choose one to make the roll, but each may add
their Sailing Die to the total.
Limithron's Guide to Naval Combat | www.limithron.com
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
Other ActionsOther Actions
Characters may take other actions like casting a spell,
attacking another creature, swinging from the rigging,
diving from a ship, etc.
Leveling Up Sailing AbilitiesLeveling Up Sailing Abilities
While characters can choose any action station, it can be
fun to have characters “level up” and gain experience at
certain stations. Here are some ideas for exploring this
concept:
Increase the value of a Sailing Die (d6, d8, etc.)
Adding modifiers to Sailing Dice (+1, +2)
Exploding Sailing Dice (reroll and add when rolling the
max value)
Giving Advantage to sailing die rolls
Covering two action stations at once
Increasing Gunners’ damage
Giving the Bosun a larger bonus
Giving an experienced Captain a Sailing Die that they
can include in any roll
New ConditionsNew Conditions
StressedStressed
A ship is Stressed when it has less than half of its starting
hit points. A ship is also Stressed if it has less than the
required crew. A stressed ship has Disadvantage on all
attacks and skill checks. The Bosun action station can
take the Raise Morale action to attempt to temporarily
remove this condition.
DerelictDerelict
A ship is Derelict when it has 0 hit points. Its speed is 0,
and it may only spend its Action Points on the Repair
action.
Drifting. The DM may choose to have a Derelict ship
drift one space each turn depending on weather
conditions.
Sinking. Every time a Derelict ship takes additional
damage, it must make a sinking saving throw. Roll a d20. If
the roll is 10 or higher, the ship does not sink. Otherwise
it fails and the ship sinks into the water. If a Derelict ship is
hit with a critical hit, it immediately fails its sinking saving
throw.
Repairing. The only action a Derelict ship may take is
Repair, which must be made at Disadvantage. If the Repair
action is successful, the ship loses the Derelict condition
and regains 1 hit point (instead of the normal amount
recovered by the Repair action).
Boarding & Close CombatBoarding & Close Combat
After ships are close enough to engage in close combat or
creature scale combat, DMs are encouraged to switch to a
5ft square grid maps. Mass combat and Mob combat rules
can be used to deal with the crew, but, like any good story,
it's the heroes and not the extras that matter! 
 
Limithron's Guide to Naval Combat | www.limithron.com
 9

=== PAGE 10 ===
Appendix A: ShipsAppendix A: Ships
Ship Stats
Vessel  CR Size Speed AC  HD  HP STRDEXCONCHRATKDamage Abilities Crew Cargo Actions
Raft 1/8 Tiny 2 16 2 3 +2 +4 -1 +0 1 - 1/2 0 1
Rowboat 1/4 Tiny 2 16 4 6 +1 +5 -1 +2 1 1d4+1 Oars 1/3 0 1
Longboat 1/2 Small 3 15 5 17 +2 +2 +0 +3 1 2d4+2 Oars 2/4 0 1
Sloop 1 Medium 6 12 6 33 +2 +0 +1 +3 2 1d8+2 Weatherly 3/9 2 2
Brigantine 2 Large 5 13 7 52 +3 -2 +2 +3 2 1d10+3 15/30 3 2
Frigate 3 Large 5 14 8 60 +2 -2 +2 +4 3 1d10+2 24/48 4 3
6th Rate Man o' War 4 Large 5 14 9 76 +2 -3 +3 +5 4 1d10+2 24/48 4 4
5th Rate Man o' War 5 Large 5 15 10 85 +3 -3 +3 +6 4 1d10+3 24/48 4 4
4th Rate Ship of the Line 6 Huge 4 15 11 115 +3 -4 +4 +6 5 1d10+3 Sluggish 60/120 4 5
3rd Rate Ship of the Line 7 Huge 4 16 12 126 +4 -4 +4 +7 5 1d10+4 Sluggish 70/150 4 5
2nd Rate Ship of the Line 8 Gargan. 3 17 12 174 +4 -5 +4 +7 5 1d12+4 Sluggish, Heavy Armor 100/300 5 5
1st Rate Ship of the Line 9 Gargan. 3 18 12 186 +5 -6 +5 +7 5 2d6+5 Sluggish, Heavy Armor 150/400 5 5
Ship AbilitiesShip Abilities
Below are descriptions for abilities listed in the Ship Stats
table.
Weatherly. This ship does not decrease its max speed
when sailing Close to the Wind.
Oars. This ship may spend half of its action points
(rounded down) to travel 2 spaces in any direction. This is
in addition to its normal movement and is not affected by
wind.
Sluggish. This ship may only rotate once per turn
(unless taking the Come About action).
Heavy Armor. This ship has Resistance against attacks
that deal 10 damage or less.


=== PAGE 11 ===
Crowd on everyCrowd on everyCrowd on everyCrowd on everyCrowd on every
inch of sail!inch of sail!inch of sail!inch of sail!inch of sail!
Weigh anchor, hoist the mains, and set sail...
rough seas lie head!
Crew up a nimble sloop and tack into the wind.
Load a Man of War with enough cannons to
scare ever captain in these water. Wage all out
war with the largest fleet to ever set sail. Capture
a magical ship with legendary abilities. Do all this
& more with Limithron's Guide to Naval Combat.
An easy to use rules supplement for the 5th
edition of the world's greatest roleplaying game
Become a Limithron patron to get ship token,
upgrades, ammo types, more ship stats, ship
cards, art handouts, encounter building
guidelines, ship customization options, terrain,
and large scale battlemaps.